I am a teacher of the Moscow Business School and head the department of programs on leadership and personal effectiveness.
I have 20 years of experience in business education, of which 10 years I headed the HR department in large insurance and financial companies.
Within the framework of the program, I have a lot of experience in the field of business management,
and I am glad to be here today to discuss two issues – the power and leadership in the organization.
First, I will tell you one parable.
A peasant saved a daoist who was drowning.
The daoist decided to thank the peasant and brought him to his hut.
He took a pumpkin from the shed, from which he took out three things – a needle, a hammer and a scythe.
He put these things at the feet of the peasant and said,
These things may not seem to be of great importance, but each of them has a magical power.
The needle gives you life and eternal health.
The hammer cuts out gold and silver coins when struck.
And the scythe gives you power to defeat any army and all enemies.
You saved my life, so you can choose whatever you want.
The peasant thought for a while. He took the needle and put it behind his belt.
You made a quick decision, said the daoist.
Don't you care about wealth and power?
I chose life, said the peasant.
If I have it, I will have power and money if I want it.
Did the old man act wisely? I often ask this question to students at lectures at the university.
They laugh. No, of course.
You had to choose a hammer.
When you have money, you can buy whatever you want, even health.
But most students answer,
You should have chosen a scythe.
If you have power, they will do everything you order.
Yes, indeed, in the everyday lives of people,
the word power is perceived as a demonic force that should be worshiped,
and as a cult force that must be respected.
If you open the Dalia dictionary,
the word power is defined in three definitions.
Right, strength, and the will to do something.
This is freedom of action.
Today we will consider the concept of power within the framework of organizational behavior.
Power is the potential ability to influence the behavior of other people,
change the course of events, overcome resistance,
make people do what they would not do under other circumstances.
In other words, power is the potential ability to mobilize resources to achieve something
without looking back at any organizational counteraction.
How can we use political power in an organization to achieve the most effective results in business?
What hidden motives of human behavior can be used in the process of power realization?
There are several types of power sources
that a manager or a manager can use in the process of managing staff.
So, power based on incentives.
Does a person have the opportunities and resources that can be used for incentives?
It is important to understand that the key figure in the process of realizing this type of power is the employee.
Because if he does not accept and appreciate the reward,
then there is no power based on reward.
I will give you a simple example.
Remember, children in school, who do not always succeed in their peers,
very often bring sweets and treat them to the names of other children
in order to use the power over others.
Power is based on punishment.
It is based on the expectation of punishment in the event of disobedience.
As an example, remember the situation in the USSR in the 30s and 40s,
when it was the power based on punishment that kept the masses of people in submission.
This type of power is very beneficial to apply in critical and crisis situations in a company.
Power based on legitimacy.
It is based on the regulation of the behavior of subordinates to the authorities
and the insistent requirement to comply with these regulations.
As an example of legitimate power, we can use the Constitution of the state.
The law is created, adopted by the people,
and the representative of the authorities has the right to demand compliance with these laws.
Referential power.
Power based on likeness.
When a person associates himself with a person in power.
There is a very important condition that the leader must be competent and successful in the eyes of his subordinates.
Only then will the referential power work.
Expert power.
Expert power is based on the fact that its bearer must have deep professional knowledge.
It is well known that the more unique knowledge an employee has, the more power he has.
That is why today there are very often situations in companies
when employees are reluctant to share their accumulated professional and even life experience.
In this regard, there is a system of knowledge management adopted in the company,
when employees are motivated to share their professional experience with their colleagues.
There are a number of factors that affect the process of power implementation.
These factors either strengthen the power in the organization or weaken it.
Let's look at these factors.
So, uncertainty.
This is related to the self-esteem of a person or a group of people.
It is known that if a person is not confident in himself and his actions, it is easier for him to influence.
The gender.
Scientists have proven that women are easier to be subject to power than men.
However, experiments and evidence of recent times put women on equal terms with men.
This affects not only business, but social life in general.
Intellect.
It is known that people with more advanced intelligence listen to other people more attentively, more willingly, and more empathetically.
Age.
Scientists have proven that children under 9 years of age are most affected.
After that, the impact remains approximately at the same level as those formed in a person before the age of 9.
Culture.
Cultural values.
Scientists have proven that Asian cultures are most affected, because their values are based on loyalty and consent.
European cultures are less affected, because their values are based on individual self-expression.
And the personal quality of a person is another factor that affects the process of power implementation.
It is well known that people in difficult situations with low self-esteem, who expect support from a stronger person, are more affected by power than people with a calm and stable rhythm of life.
The general situational model of power was described quite well by French Raiven and Kelman.
They focused their model on four main factors, which you see now on the slide.
One of them is the required source of power, which we have just discussed.
The second is the process of implementation.
This is how the object of power should behave so that the process of power takes place.
The third factor is the subjectivity of the object of power to influence.
In other words, what motivates, what moves a person at the time of power implementation.
And the necessary conditions for the implementation of power as a result of which the object and subject of power want to receive from interaction.
Thus, the situational model of power looks like this.
It can help you in your further work, when you are engaged in organizational diagnostics and study organizational behavior and corporate culture of your company.
Let's look at one of the examples. It is highlighted in blue on my slide.
So, the required source of power, for example, is compulsion.
For the implementation of this source of power, it is necessary to organize or motivate an employee to obey.
The motivating factor of the object of power is the desire to avoid punishment from the subject of power.
And, accordingly, the necessary conditions for the implementation of this process of power are constant supervision of the object.
Thus, according to this situational model, you can study and review all the sources of power, the process of its implementation, subjectivity of the object to influence and the necessary conditions.
So, power and organizational policy intertwine very closely.
Organizational policy is a complex of intended methods of influence, undertaken by a person or a group of people in order to strengthen or protect their own interests when possible alternatives arise.
It is generally known today that political games, so-called political games, exist in all formal organizations.
It is generally proven that the fewer political games, the more effective the organization works.
And, in turn, the more active political games are played, the less effective the organization moves towards achieving its goal.
Let's now look at the spheres that affect the political nature.
Resources. These are financial resources.
It is generally known that to implement political games in an organization, more resources are always needed than they are declared in organizational documents.
Goals.
The more vague the goals of the organization are, the less clearly they are spelled out, the organization creates a kind of chaos and misunderstanding, which allows the emergence of political games.
Decisions. Another sphere that affects the political nature.
It is generally known that the more vague the decisions in an organization are, the longer they are adopted, the more they strengthen the political games within the organization.
No solutions, as they say, no problems.
Technologies. It is generally known that the more complex the technologies within the company are, the more complex the hierarchy built into the organization, the more it strengthens the political nature of organizational behavior.
And changes. We know that changes are an inevitable process in any organization. It allows the organization to develop due to the existing temporary crises in it.
Therefore, it is impossible to avoid changes in organizational behavior. And you don't have to strive to do it. It is very important how much top management and the company's management can manage changes in the organization in order to minimize the political nature of organizational behavior.
I will give you a simple example. When Jack Welch was appointed the CEO of General Electric, the first thing he did was to review all five spheres that strengthen the political nature of the company and influence each of them.
He set clear goals, embodied the organizational structure, minimized all technological processes in the company, prepared people for the skill of managing changes and clearly specified all the incoming and outgoing resources of the company.
Now you can open a workbook, this is a case, in which the real business situation is described and you need to answer the questions asked, which will allow you to consolidate your knowledge in the field of leadership theories and in the field of power in the organization.
What is power?
On the contrary, we very often meet leaders in the organization who are not leaders. In this block, we will consider all the existing theories of leadership study, as well as the modern problems of leadership and the latest theories of discovery in this field.
So, what is leadership? How to assess leadership qualities? What kind of person is a leader in our idea today? And what distinguishes him from a non-leader?
Let's first get acquainted with the definition of leadership. Leadership is an attempt by the leader, using different sources of power and his own set of skills, to influence a group of people and direct their efforts to achieve the goal.
Let's look at one example. Here is a description of three candidates. These are the leaders of their era, who have great power. I suggest you, according to your inner values and criteria, to determine a person who, in your opinion, is the ideal example of a leader.
So, candidate A is associated with dishonest politicians and consults with astrologers. He has two girlfriends, he smokes a lot and drinks up to 8 glasses of martini every day. Not a very pleasant image.
Candidate B is a student who has been expelled from college twice, he used to drink opium, now he sleeps until noon and drinks a liter of whiskey every day. Probably, this is possible.
And candidate B is a hero of war, a vegetarian, does not smoke, in special cases only drinks beer, has no intercourse.
I am often told by my course listeners that the ideal leader is candidate B. I dare to assume that you, too, have involuntarily drawn to the choice of this particular person.
Let's see now, let's open the secrets, who is who. So, candidate A is Franklin Roosevelt, candidate B is Winston Churchill and candidate B is Adolf Hitler.
Please note that all three candidates are unrivaled leaders of their era and not only of their country, but of the whole world. However, each of them, you may have noticed, has not only unique leadership qualities, but if you compare them, these qualities are in stark contradiction with each other.
This is where the history of leadership study began, which eventually came and was divided into three approaches. Personal, behavioral and situational.
Now we will consider what is the personal approach in the theory of leadership study, who was its founder, what is the essence of the personal approach, what are the advantages and disadvantages of this theory.
So, the earliest stage of the study of leadership qualities is based on the analysis of qualities that a leader needs to manage. In other words, scientists tried to explain what qualities distinguish a leader from a non-leader.
They dared to assume that leaders have a certain set of qualities that are given to a person by nature and never change over time. Therefore, if you were born a leader, then you will be a leader. And if you were not born a leader with certain qualities, then you will never become a leader.
This is how Teodor Tiet wrote the book The Art of a Leader for the first time. With the publication of this book in 1935, the theory of the personal approach and the theory of leadership qualities emerged.
Please note how Tiet described the basic qualities of a leader. For this purpose, he conducted a study of a very large number of great people of his time, in which he tried to find qualities that unite them.
Here is what Tiet's picture looks like. Physical and emotional endurance, understanding of the purpose of an organization and the direction of its activities, enthusiasm, friendliness, the disposition of others, and orderliness.
A few years later, Robert Stockdill tried to conduct a similar experiment. He also collected a certain number of great people of his time and tried to describe their qualities and determine the key competencies or qualities that unite all the leaders they study.
Here is what Stockdill's picture looks like. The main qualities of a leader are intelligence and intellectual abilities, dominance or dominance over others, self-confidence, activity, energy and knowledge of affairs.
However, the most interesting achievement in the field of studying the qualities of a leader belongs to Oran Bennis. He conducted the following experiment.
Robert Stockdill compared the qualities of great people of his time and found out the qualities of a leader that distinguish these people from non-leaders. Oran Bennis made a parallel between a leader and a manager.
If you look at the table on the slide, you can see that all the qualities that are signed under the manager distinguish a leader from a non-leader. That is, the qualities that, according to Bennis, do not belong to the leader, but to the manager.
Bennis said that a leader is a guiding image, passion and integrity. That is, he is an inspirer of his ideas, which calls people to action, but does not organize the process.
Thus, the theories of the qualities of a leader have calculated more than 80 competences by the end of the Second World War. Is it possible to combine 80 qualities of a leader in one person? Of course not.
Moreover, these 80 qualities of a leader, which, according to the research, scientists found, are impossible to combine in one person, because they often contradict each other.
If we look at the three leading images that scientists and researchers of that time have, you will see that they are completely different in image, temperament and type of people.
Thus, by the end of the Second World War, it became obvious that it was impossible to invent the qualities of a leader. There is no such person with such qualities, who could be taken as the ideal of a leader and, accordingly, other successors could be selected for him.
This is a minus of the theory of the personal approach. Plus, the theory of the personal approach became a push for subsequent researches of scientists, who began to study not the leader's qualities, but the models of behavior of leaders.
In other words, the essence of the behavioral approach is not the qualities that determine a person as a leader or not, but certain models of behavior that a certain person transmits.
Let's define the concept of a leader's style. Remember, in Greek, the word style meant a pen. Subsequently, we began to associate the word pen with the word handwriting, that is, the manifestation of individuality. Thus, style is a manifestation of individuality.
In turn, the leader's style is a model of the behavior of a leader, used to influence a group of people and to direct efforts to achieve a common goal. It is important to note that this is a model of the behavior of a leader.
The first person to propose the theory of the behavior model of a leader was a psychologist Kurt Levin. He conducted a very unusual experiment with a group of boys who made theatrical masks.
The age of the boys was 10-12 years. Kurt Levin appointed the leader of this group and asked him to broadcast different styles of management over a certain period of time. The first of them is authoritarian, when the power is concentrated in the hands of the leader.
The effectiveness of the work was very high. The number of masks produced by the boys broke all records over a certain period of time. After that, the leader was offered to change the leader's style and become a more democratic leader.
What happened? The number of masks produced sharply decreased. There were much fewer of them, but they were different from the previous masks, more creative and more unusual in execution.
Thus, Kurt Levin came to the conclusion that the most effective style or model of behavior of the leader is authoritarian, because the experience of the boys indicated the high workability and effectiveness of the group of people.
However, he did not take into account the fact that the masks produced by the boys under the leadership of the authoritarian leader were not different in terms of creative approach, variety, or creativity. Yes, there were really more of them.
This was the disadvantage of Kurt Levin's research. Now we will briefly focus on the results of the research conducted at the Michigan University and the University of Ohio.
The main concept of these studies is that the style of leadership proposed by the researchers is either oriented towards workers, high orientation towards interpersonal relations in the group, or towards the task, towards production, high concentration on the production and technical aspects of the work.
Subsequently, the research of the Michigan University and the University of Ohio became the basis for the development of more advanced methods of behavioral theory of leadership.
One of them we will now consider in more detail. This is the management grid of Robert Blake and Jane Moulton. Robert Blake and Jane Moulton arranged all the styles of behavior, and there are only 81 of them, according to their concept, on two axes.
Please pay attention to the following. The vertical axis is the degree of accounting for the interests of people, and the horizontal axis is the degree of accounting for the interests of production. On a 9-point scale, there is an axis on the vertical and an axis on the horizontal.
Thus, according to the management grid of Blake and Moulton, there are 81 styles of behavior of the leader. Let's take a brief look at each of them.
So, the 1-9 square is the high degree of orientation towards interpersonal relations in the group and the very low orientation of the leadership towards the task. The so-called management in the spirit of a suburban club.
The 1-1 square is called the poor management, when the orientation towards the interests of people in the company is very low, and at the same time the low orientation towards the tasks of production. This is considered the most unacceptable style, as you understand, and this is obvious.
The 9-1 square is the high degree of orientation towards the tasks and the extremely low degree of orientation towards the interests of people. The so-called authority of subordination. The authoritarian style of management.
The 9-9 square is the so-called group management, where the orientation towards the interests of the employee, the interpersonal relations within the group and, to the same extent, the high orientation towards the interests of production and tasks. According to the concept of Moulton and Blake, this is the ideal style of management.
There is also an intermediate style of management, the 5-5 square, the so-called organizational management, when the need for production results and the maintenance of people's moral attitude at a decent level is balanced.
In business, the manager very often makes a fluctuation between the 1-9 style and the 9-9 style. In reality, you will rarely find a situation today when the manager is focused on both the management style and the other style.
What is the disadvantage of the Moulton and Blake management grid? They unambiguously recognize the 9-9 square as the ideal style of management. However, it is not always proven whether the 9-9 style or the so-called group management will be effective in all situations.
Moreover, we have previously said that in crisis and critical situations in the organization, the 9-9 style is not always acceptable and not always effective in the process of changing the current company.
I think it will be interesting for you to recall, if you already know about it, or to remind and tell, if you do not know about it, about the motivational theory of Douglas MacGregor, who called it the theory of X and Y.
However, later the theory of Y emerged from Douglas MacGregor, who said that a person is a being capable of self-realization.
And people consider work a natural state, there is no need to push, force and direct a person to creativity. This is what the theory of motivation X and Y, which belongs to MacGregor, looks like in general.
However, all behavioral approaches that I have suggested are excluded by one important factor. Behavioral models are clear. Authoritarian, task-oriented, democratic, interpersonal.
At the same time, none of the researchers has given the most important arguments in which situations, with which employees, it is necessary to apply this or that style of management. In other words, the researchers did not take into account situational factors that determine the success or failure of the group.
Thus, in the theories of behavioral approach, I summarize the above, factors describing the needs and personal qualities of employees, the nature of the task, the requirements and the impact of the environment were not taken into account.
Take, for example, Martin Luther King Jr. was unlikely to have a chance to become a prominent leader in civil rights, for example, in 1900. However, he became such in 1950-1960. Everything depends on the situation and the time in which the leader is.
Thus, the theories of behavioral approach became a powerful impetus for the development of the next direction in the study of leadership, situational leadership, when not only behavioral models, the qualities and competencies of the leader, but also the situation in which the leader was and is in one or another time were taken into account.
Let's first decide what situational leadership is. This is, I remind you, the third approach in the theory of leadership study.
Situational leadership involves the interaction and influence of various factors on the behavior of the leader. These situational factors include the needs and personal qualities of employees, the nature of the task, the requirements and the impact of the environment.
As you already understand, situational leadership does not create, but continues the experience of previous studies, when the interests of the group and the interests of the situation are taken into account.
One of the most interesting solutions, one of the most interesting theories in the field of situational leadership, today in business we call the model of situational leadership the Hersey and Blanchard.
What is the focus of this theory and what do its researchers focus on? If you pay attention to the square consisting of four planes, the behavior of the leader is oriented to the attitude in the team and to the task.
Remember, this is very similar to the management grid of Moulton and Blake from the theory of behavioral approach. However, what is the difference between the situational leadership of Hersey and Blanchard and the behavioral grid of Moulton and Blake?
You probably remember that there were not taken into account the interests, needs, level of readiness, task structure of the employees. It was in this grid that Hersey and Blanchard took into account the behavior of the employee at different stages of his development.
In this scheme, this is denoted by the letters S1, S2, S3 and S4. The model of situational leadership of Hersey and Blanchard implies four styles of behavior of the leader, starting from the strict and directive, moving to the mentor, then the supportive, and at the end, when the employee is completely ready and completely built up,
his professional and personal competencies, delegating style. Let's look at how the situational behavior of the subordinates of the Hersey and Blanchard successors describes.
In this table, the behavior of the subordinates is denoted by the letters R1, R2, R3 and R4. So, the component of the behavior of the subordinates, we call it the level of readiness of the employee, depends on two components.
The first is the level of competence, professional training, and the level of his mood. In other words, we say that this is the level of his motivation, readiness for work. So, depending on the stage, the level of readiness of the employee, the leader applies one or another style of management.
For example, if the employee has a very low level of competence, that is, his professional knowledge and skills are at zero, while he has an average or higher level of mood, that is, he is motivated and eager for work, the leader applies the style of leadership S1 to him, that is, clear and directive.
He instructs his employee, instructs, tells, teaches and controls.
The employee is ready to work with the client, knows how to fill out reports, and the leader is stuck at the level of style S1. As a result, the employee moves to another level of readiness, and the leader remains the same.
This often happens, especially in sales and management departments, when salespeople, as we say, burn out and leave. They burn out for a simple reason, the manager did not change his style of leadership in time.
However, as the practice of research shows, the leader is rarely used in the style of S4 or delegating. Now you can probably answer the question why the leader uses the style of S4 the least, fully delegating to his employee.
The answer to the question is clear and predictable. If you do not go through all the previous stages with your employees, starting from control, supervision, mentorship and support, it is clear that delegating to a person who does not do as you would like is scary, reluctant and undesirable.
So it turns out that employees grow or do not grow without our participation, and we apply one style of leadership that is more understandable, more comfortable and no matter what the consequences of this style of leadership are.
The data of the management grid is used very actively today by leading consultants in the field of staff management. There is a certain survey that offers 12 management situations, each of which is divided into 4 options for the behavior of the leader.
This survey allows us to measure the leadership flexibility and leadership effectiveness, after which training groups are formed and the behavior of managers and leaders is corrected so that they can apply not one, as I said, familiar and understandable style of behavior, but depending on the situation, on the level of readiness of the employee, change and vary these behavioral styles.
According to the survey, about 8% of leaders have very low leadership flexibility, that is, they cannot effectively change one or another style of behavior in their management. 8%, as practice shows, is not such a large number of top managers, so as not to engage in the company of their development and training.
Another model of situational leadership, which is called the path-goal, is proposed by Terence Mitchell and Robert House. Mitchell and House propose 4 styles of behavior of the leader, which in a sense are similar to the previous theory, which I told you in detail.
However, the main concept of the theory of the path-goal is based on the fact that the leader must supplement all situational factors and personal characteristics of the subordinate with his behavior.
This is great, of course, but only up to a certain point. When an employee grows professionally and his motivation increases, then any intervention of the leader in order to supplement or compensate for the behavior of the subordinate is perceived by the subordinate as an insult.
And a very simple question arises, why do we need a leader now? Therefore, the path-goal, which is quite perfect in its concept of theory, is very rarely used in practice.
Another concept of behavioral theory belongs to Fiedler. He concentrated his attention on the matrix consisting of two axes.
In this slide, in the Fiedler situational model, you see a certain scheme, which lies in the matrix of two axes. High and low leadership efficiency and favorable and unfavorable conditions in the company.
According to the Fiedler model, the leader, which is oriented to the task, is highlighted in red dotted line, depending on the situation in the company, is either very effective in favorable conditions, or absolutely ineffective in unfavorable conditions.
And vice versa, the leader, which is oriented to the task, is highlighted in red dotted line, depending on the situation in the company, is either very effective in favorable conditions, or absolutely ineffective in unfavorable conditions.
According to the Fiedler model, the leader is a person who is characterized by a completely rigid behavior, which is familiar only to him, either an orientation to the task of production, or an orientation to human relations.
And when a leader with an orientation to human relations, for example, falls into favorable conditions in the company, Fiedler suggests either to change the situation or to change the leader.
In this regard, the Fiedler situational model also has a fairly perfect theoretical concept, but in practice it is rarely used. It is rarely used because it is very difficult to process the effectiveness of the leader's calculations, results of work, and the effectiveness of the diagnosis of the situation in the company.
For this reason, the Fiedler situational model is convenient only to study, but to use in practice is extremely inconvenient.
However, scientists have not stopped and do not stop in their search for the perfect leader. They conduct numerous studies, and each new study opens up more and more interesting facets of the behavior of the leader.
This is what scientists say, they understand the secret of leadership. One of the most interesting achievements in modern leadership study is the discovery of Daniel Goleman in the field of emotional intelligence.
Daniel Goleman believes that the main components of emotional intelligence are the following. To know oneself and one's emotions, to be able to control oneself and one's emotions, to understand the feelings and moods of others, and to control the emotions and moods of other people.
If we consider in detail the components of emotional intelligence, let's go in order. What is it to know oneself and one's emotions?
But very often we face a situation today, a rather erroneous situation, when the leader comes to the team and the first thing he tries to do is quickly take power into his own hands and quickly subordinate himself to the surrounding or employees of the unit in which he is appointed as a leader.
However, at the same time, we often forget about one main action. Until we are in harmony with ourselves, until we are not congruent with ourselves, our emotions are very well and easily noticeable and reflected in the actions, feelings of others or our subordinates.
Accordingly, it is impossible to manage a group of people without learning to manage yourself in various situations.
Therefore, the first thing that Daniel Goleman suggests in his research, and in practice it has already found its confirmation, is a very detailed and detailed study of oneself, one's emotions, one's feelings, one's reactions to the impact of the external environment.
The more a person knows about himself, the more comfortable he is with himself, which means he is predictable.
In a critical or difficult situation for himself, he knows about his behavior models, and therefore can easily manage them.
And this is the second component of emotional intelligence, the ability to control your emotions.
But to manage does not mean to suppress these emotions, but it means to be able to agree with your inner values.
The third component is the ability to understand the feelings and desires of other people.
Here we are talking about subordinates or a group of other people, that is, subordinates or a group.
This is the so-called empathy.
A person will never be able to learn to manage the motivation of another person, I repeat, until he agrees with himself.
I will give you a simple example.
You are the head of your unit, a woman comes to you, an employee, who asks to go with her child for rest and treatment.
However, she leads a very important project that needs to be closed urgently, in two weeks.
And you are facing a choice.
The question arises to agree with your values.
A. Let the employee go on vacation, which means to close the project, because it is not possible to replace her.
B. Do not let the employee go on vacation, cure the child.
You will experience for some time, maybe even a long time, a sense of guilt before this employee and before yourself.
The question arises how to act.
So, the developed emotional intelligence of the leader, I will once again point out your attention,
is, first of all, the ability to agree with yourself, with your values.
And if for you at the moment the value is family relations and the health of your employees and subordinates,
then you let the employee go without looking back at your actions.
Or vice versa, if for you, personally for you as a leader, at the moment the value is a business task and a successful completion of the project,
then you do not let the employee go on vacation, while not feeling guilty, because you made this decision, you agreed with yourself.
Please note that emotional intelligence and situational leadership intertwine very closely.
Accordingly, the last component of emotional intelligence is the ability to manage a group of people, the motivation of other people.
A person cannot manage the motivation and the group of other people until he has learned to agree with himself and with his values.
According to the concept of emotional leadership proposed by Goleman, there are two styles of leadership, resonating and dissonant.
If you look at the slide, you can read the definition of resonating and dissonant leadership and how they differ from each other.
Resonance is when two people or a group of people are tuned to one emotional wave, that is, they feel synchronous.
And dissonant leadership is when two people or a group of people feel emotional inconvenience and feel constantly uncomfortable.
At the same time, Daniel Goleman recommends, depending on the situation, to use both resonant and dissonant leadership.
If in resonant leadership emotional intelligence plays an important but not so dominant role,
in dissonant leadership, when we broadcast an ambitious and authoritarian style,
we need to be very careful with our emotions so that, as Goleman says, we do not turn into a chainsaw effect and cut out all the best employees of the company
just because we need to be cold-blooded and harsh here, not holding back our emotions.
This often happens in the company today.
For some reason, it is customary to believe that the ambitious and authoritarian style of leadership allows the company to work more effectively.
Yes, maybe for a while.
However, constant losses of creative people on a strategic scale will never lead the company to effective results.
However, there is a deep misconception that emotional leadership is a two-day, three-day training.
You came, learned and started working.
No, of course not.
If you are thinking about your own development of leadership skills or the development of leadership skills of your employees, top managers and managers of your company,
it is very important to take into account the fact, pay attention to the slide,
that the research conducted by the Oederherd School of Management, the University of the Western Reserve District,
according to the research, pay attention to the years after the course, up to 7 years.
As Daniel Goleman says, a person must constantly develop emotional intelligence.
This is not a one-time procedure and not a two-day training.
Moreover, this is a process of self-development and self-learning to a greater extent than coaching or supervision of a certain coach next to the manager.
Pay attention to how self-awareness and self-control, social sensitivity,
vary over time and are reflected in the abilities of different groups of students.
The trend is as follows.
The longer a person studies, the more actively he develops in his consciousness and self-control.
However, social sensitivity is declining.
Remember, I told you about the example of a manager who is facing a dilemma whether to let a woman go on vacation or not.
This is social sensitivity.
First of all, you must agree with yourself.
At the same time, if you pay attention to the Bayatis theory in self-managed learning,
it is focused on five important factors that have intermediate results.
So, the training of emotional intelligence or self-managed learning, according to the Bayatis theory,
begins with my ideal self.
You can conduct this experiment after this course even by yourself without other people's help and without additional training.
So, my ideal self. Who do I want to be?
So, the Bayatis theory of self-managed learning is focused on five main blocks.
My ideal self.
Here you define your strengths and weaknesses, and your ideal does not coincide with your real qualities.
After defining your strengths and weaknesses, you develop a self-development program.
That is, how you can develop your strengths.
Then you try new behavioral models in practice.
You train new behavioral models in practice.
And again you return to the image of my ideal self, only in an updated concept.
Then you define your strengths and weaknesses again.
And the Bayatis theory of self-managed learning, that is, the closed circle of learning, is repeated again and again.
All this leads, if you pay attention to the diagram, to the development of trust relationships,
which stimulate and inspire at every stage of the process.
This is how self-managed learning looks like in the framework of the study of emotional intelligence, which belongs to the Bayatis.
Today we talk a lot about leadership and connect this word with the concept of charisma.
Researchers, especially scientists of the modern era, also ask the question of studying charisma in leadership.
And they try to understand what charisma is, whether this quality is innate in a person, and whether charisma is always needed.
The answer to this question is clear.
A charismatic leader is a person prone to risk.
This is a person who is able to inspire other people to take the plunge.
However, it is not worth developing or concentrating on the competence of charisma
when you are looking for employees of the middle level or lower management level in the organization.
Because a charismatic leader is a person who is able to determine his own goals of development
and lead the organization according to his own goals of development.
Imagine a situation when the head of the department or the head of the department is a charismatic leader in your organization.
Accordingly, he, as a charismatic leader, will not lead the organization to achieve its goals, but his department or his management.
This very often leads to a break between the goals of the organization and the goals of the unit led by the charismatic leader.
Therefore, in modern concepts for studying charismatic leaders, scientists have come to the unambiguous conclusion
that a charismatic leader is a leader of the highest level or echelon of power.
Another interesting study is owned by Harvard Business School professors today,
who also touched on the mystery of leadership, calling it contextual intelligence.
What does it mean?
Contextual intelligence is the ability of a person to catch the emerging trends in business.
Very often, when we hire employees, we carefully read out their CV and focus our attention on their past achievements.
That yes, in this organization, at this time, a person has led his team to such results and such success.
However, do you remember in my previous story, when we studied the theory of behavioral approach,
I asked you a question about Martin Luther King?
It is very important in what context a person is and how well he feels this context.
Therefore, the fact that the top manager had incredible success and breakthroughs at the previous place of work
does not always mean that they will be at his current place of work.
Therefore, yes, it is really important to take into account the context of past achievements of the candidate,
and it is very important to understand in what context, relationship, situation and time the candidate gets.
And will he be successful in this context?
Let's turn to a small example, in which I want to demonstrate to you the ambitious style of leadership.
And how often, if the bearer of this style of leadership does not have the skills of emotional intelligence,
it affects the efficiency of the work of both the top manager and the entire department.
Let's call this person Dmitry.
He was a successful student at the university and soon received a good job in the research department of a large pharmaceutical company.
Dmitry was a very ambitious employee, always set high standards,
developed professionally and successfully achieved his results.
Soon Dmitry became a star of his department, he was consulted by the council, even by the guards of the employees.
Immediately after that, Dmitry was appointed head of the department of a large pharmaceutical company
and continued to set high standards not only for himself, but also for the employees of the department he trusted.
The employees managed to achieve the ambitious goals of the head of their department.
Soon after that, Dmitry was appointed head of a large sector in this pharmaceutical company
and now he was faced with more global tasks, such as strategic planning,
objectives and the ability to delegate his powers to subordinates.
The subordinates were as competent and professionally developed as Dmitry.
However, due to the habit of his ambitious management style, Dmitry could not delegate his powers to his employees
and for all, even the most routine tasks, he took on himself, which led to problems in the entire sector,
because the work in the strategic direction of the department was interrupted.
After that, the head of the department offered Dmitry to return to the previous position of head of the department
and to start researching again.
Here you can clearly see an example of an ambitious leadership style and the lack of emotional competence,
that is, sensitivity to the environment and subordinates.
If Dmitry had sensitivity and empathy and understood the level of development and the motivating needs of his subordinates,
the team would have started working much more complex and more effectively,
Dmitry could easily delegate his powers to his subordinates and take on more global projects as a leader.
I will give you an example of the situational model of Fiedler's leadership.
In the recruitment market today there is such an understanding that if a company is developing successfully,
it has enough favorable working conditions,
when they are looking for a middle and high-ranking leader,
for some reason, one of the main competencies is always offered,
this is a calm person and oriented to human relations in the team.
In order to avoid the consequences, so that such a driver does not come and destroy the established interpersonal relations.
However, as practice shows, this is not always a successful choice.
Perhaps, at the operational level, for a while, such a leader will be able to come and support the established traditions in the company.
However, if you remember, study the pattern and stages of the development of a company and any business,
at the moment when favorable working conditions have developed in the company,
it is sometimes useful to look at a leader who is oriented to the task,
just such a driver who will be able to join the team,
for some time shake him gently and set a new direction of work.
However, this is not always the right approach.
Perhaps, at the operational and tactical level,
yes, when favorable working conditions have developed in the company and interpersonal relations have developed,
for some time a leader, oriented to human relations,
will be able to support the established corporate culture and develop organizational behavior.
However, in such situations, it is most interesting to look at a driver,
a person oriented to the task, who will be able to come and shake the team for some time
and lead it to new goals, new achievements and new tasks.
What is the knowledge management system in the company?
I will briefly dwell on this topic.
The knowledge management system in the company is an internal Internet portal
that allows employees to describe their cross-interaction both inside the company and with external clients.
Thus, when a new employee comes to the workplace,
he has access to information that his predecessor left for him,
with whom he interacts, what tasks he performs, where he studies, where he calls,
from whom he receives what documents and what he transmits to whom.
At the same time, the successor uses not only the previous knowledge left by the predecessor,
but also accumulates his practical professional experience and brings it to this Internet portal.
Thus, in the case of a career growth or the departure of an employee from the company,
the company does not lose anything, because it retains a large piece of information
that is associated with the interaction of this particular employee both inside the company and with clients.
Thus, in the case of an employee moving up the career ladder or leaving the company,
the Internet portal retains complete information about whom this particular person interacted with,
what tasks he performed, and everything related to internal communications and document circulation.
The only problem for many companies when they introduce a knowledge management system is a question of motivation.
How to stimulate employees with actions such as voluntary transfer of their knowledge to the company's bank?
A simple example of a power based on incentives is today's motivational programs for sales managers.
For some reason, it so often happens that sales managers are reluctant to accept and use the bonuses and interest
that the manager promises them for successful sales.
It is worth considering whether the type of power the manager or leader has chosen at the moment
in order to motivate his subordinates to work effectively.
Most likely, in this situation, at this particular time,
the power based on incentives, if it is not appreciated and accepted by its subordinates, is not the best choice.
What is the power and leadership in an organization?
Today we have discussed the concept of power and leadership in an organization.
We have been able to determine that power and leadership are closely related.
During this course, you have been able to learn the main types of power sources
and the main spheres that influence organizational behavior and organizational policy
that the power in an organization carries out.
When we studied the theory of leadership, you were able to remember three basic approaches to the theory of leadership.
The earliest of them is the personal approach, which studied the qualities that distinguish leaders from non-leaders.
It became the basis for further studies of the behavioral approach,
when scientists studied behavioral models of leaders that distinguish them from non-leaders.
And the most modern and perfect concept of the leadership approach
we have recorded the models of situational leadership,
which study not only the qualities and models of the behavior of the leader,
but also the conditions, people and the structure of the task that the followers perform.
We have also touched upon the concept of emotional intelligence in the modern study of leadership,
which includes four main components, and contextual intelligence.